\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ./rmsbolt.info
@settitle RMSbolt User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* RMSbolt: (rmsbolt).   Viewing disassembly in Emacs with RMSbolt.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title RMSbolt User Manual
@author Jay Kamat
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top RMSbolt User Manual
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Installation::
* Running::
* Configuring::
* Languages::
* Integrations::
* Developing::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Quelpa::

Configuring

* Option List::

Languages

* C/C++::
* OCaml::
* Rust::
* Haskell::
* Python::
* Java::
* PHP::
* Pony::
* Emacs Lisp::
* Common Lisp::
* D::

Integrations

* C/C++: C/C++x. 

C/C++

* QuickStart Guide::
Developing

* Adding a Language::
@end detailmenu
@end menu

:PREAMBLE:
RMSbolt is a compiler output viewer in Emacs.

RMSbolt tries to make it easy to see what your compiler is doing. It does this
by showing you the assembly output of a given source code file. It also
highlights which source code a given assembly block corresponds to, and vice
versa. It supports more types of languages than any previous tool of its kind.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

A @uref{https://melpa.org/#/rmsbolt,melpa package} is available for rmsbolt.

No dependencies are required, other than an Emacs newer than 25.1
@menu
* Quelpa::
@end menu

@node Quelpa
@section Quelpa

This is a quelpa formula for RMSbolt

@lisp
(quelpa '(rmsbolt
	  :files (:defaults "starters")
	  :fetcher gitlab
	  :repo "jgkamat/rmsbolt"))
@end lisp

@node Running
@chapter Running

Once installed, use the @code{rmsbolt-starter} command to generate starter files, or
enable @code{rmsbolt-mode} in a supported language. Then run @code{rmsbolt-compile} or use
the default @code{C-c C-c} binding to pop open a disassembly buffer. After the first
run, the buffer should automatically update.

@node Configuring
@chapter Configuring

RMSbolt is primarily configured with Emacs local variables. This lets you change
compiler and rmsbolt options simply by editing a local variable block. The
starter files have this block with some common settings:

@example
// Local Variables:
// rmsbolt-command: "gcc -O0"
// rmsbolt-disassemble: nil
// End:
@end example

@strong{Note}: @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Specifying-File-Variables.html#Specifying-File-Variables,the Local Variable block must be 3000 characters from the end of the
file to work}. Any method of setting buffer-local variables will work though.
@menu
* Option List::
@end menu

@node Option List
@section Option List

@itemize
@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-command

Determines the prefix of the compilation command to use. Use this to switch
between compilers or pass flags to your compiler.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-default-directory

Determines the default directory to compile from, which is useful if you are
building with a build-system.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-disassemble

Disassemble from a compiled binary with objdump, if supported.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-filter-directives

Whether to filter unused assembly directives out of final output.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-filter-labels

Whether to filter unused labels from final output

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-filter-comment-only

Whether to filter lines that are comment-only.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-asm-format

Which output format to use. Supported values vary between languages. In
general, ~"intel"~ and ~"att"~ are supported. @code{nil} means to use the tool's
defaults. Other values may work as well, depending on your compiler.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-demangle

Demangle the output, if supported.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-ignore-binary-limit

Ignore the binary size limit for disassembly. This will almost certainly cause
Emacs to hang during large processing.

@item
Local Option: rmsbolt-demangle

Enable or disable demangling, if the language supports it.
@end itemize

@node Languages
@chapter Languages

This section covers languages-specific quirks and features.
@menu
* C/C++::
* OCaml::
* Rust::
* Haskell::
* Python::
* Java::
* PHP::
* Pony::
* Emacs Lisp::
* Common Lisp::
* D::
@end menu

@node C/C++
@section C/C++

C/C++ is the primary focus of support, and will get new features and support
first.

Demangling is enabled if @code{c++filt} is available on the path.

@node OCaml
@section OCaml

OCaml disassembly is supported through both @code{ocamlopt} and through disassembly
with objdump.

@node Rust
@section Rust

Demangling is done with @code{rustfilt} if it is on the path.

@node Haskell
@section Haskell

Demangling is done with the compiler-explorer demangler, named
to @code{haskell-demangler} and placed on the path.

@node Python
@section Python

Support for viewing bytecode only. Python @uref{https://bugs.python.org/issue2506,doesn't have many options}, so most
tweakables will not work. Python 3.7 is required for recursion into functions,
otherwise only top level code will be shown. Python 2 is completely unsupported.

@node Java
@section Java

Parses the output of @code{javap} to get debug information and disassembly.

@node PHP
@section PHP

Requires the @uref{https://github.com/derickr/vld,vld php extension} to display PHP opcodes. Without that, you will
not get any output.

If you use hack (denoted by @code{<hh?} at the top of your file), you will not get
source->asm matching or filtering.

@node Pony
@section Pony

Filtering on pony is not as effective as pony asm includes references to
machine-generated functions. This means the output will be slower to generate,
similar to disassembly in other languages. The pony file being viewed will be
copied into it's own directory, making it much harder to view non-toy examples.

@node Emacs Lisp
@section Emacs Lisp

No support for source->asm matching, filtering, or automatic recompile.

Emacs 26 or the @code{cl-print} package are required.

@node Common Lisp
@section Common Lisp

No support for source->asm matching or filtering. Only @code{sbcl} and @code{clisp}
supported at the moment, with @code{sbcl} giving much better results.

@node D
@section D

Assembly listing is supported through @code{ldc}

@node Integrations
@chapter Integrations

This section covers integrations that RMSbolt provides, which make it easier to
use RMSbolt with complex projects with many dependencies.

Integrations are very new, and as such, may be highly buggy and require extra
work to debug.

Most integrations only take effect when @code{rmsbolt-command} and
@code{rmsbolt-default-directory} are nil! Setting either of these will disable any
attempt at using the integration system.
@menu
* C/C++: C/C++x. 
@end menu

@node C/C++x
@section C/C++

C/C++ will look for a @code{compile_commands.json} file in any directory higher than
the source file. Once it finds one, it will parse the file trying to find a
match for the current file, and if it finds one, it will compile using the flags
present there. Many files (like headers) are not present in
@code{compile_commands.json} and will not work (at this time).

Because the compilation commands in @code{compile_commands.json} assume the files are
compiled in order, please make sure to fully compile the project before
beginning, otherwise, you could see compiler errors.

In order to transform the given file, some flags are removed. This is the most
brittle part of the current system, and could cause compile errors.

On projects with a lot of imports, the resulting assembly file might be large,
which may cause Emacs to hang.
@menu
* QuickStart Guide::
@end menu

@node QuickStart Guide
@subsection QuickStart Guide

@enumerate
@item
Generate a @code{compile_commands.json} file, and ensure it is in a domineering directory.
@example
cmake -DCMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=1 .
@end example
@item
Compile the project completely. If you pass flags to your build system, make
sure they are passed when generating @code{compile_commands.json} as well.
@item
Open the file in question, and enable @code{rmsbolt-mode}.
@item
Run @code{rmsbolt-compile}.
@end enumerate

@node Developing
@chapter Developing

These are some tips which will help people working on developing or customizing RMSbolt.
@menu
* Adding a Language::
@end menu

@node Adding a Language
@section Adding a Language

Adding support for a new language is fairly easy. The closer it is to existing
compilers, the easier it will be (to the point where a clone of a C compiler is
just a couple copy-paste lines). However, it is not excessively hard to add
support for completely foreign compilers and bytecode/assembly formats.

As a minimum starting point, you must know how to compile a source file to
assembly or bytecode on the command line, and know how the line numbers are
available in the compiled form if they exist.

@enumerate
@item
@uref{../rmsbolt.el,Add a new entry to the language definitions statement.}
@itemize
@item
To do this, you will need to (at a minimum) add a mode, compile-command, a
compile-cmd-function, and a starter file name.
@item
The compile-cmd-function is a function that will turn local variable
settings into a valid command which will take in a filename and output
assembly or an executable. See @code{rmsbolt--c-compile-cmd} for an example.
@item
When building compilation commands, please make sure to use absolute paths,
as the default-directory is not guaranteed to be stable.
@item
If the assembly is not in a standard format, you will need to define a
@code{process-asm-custom-fn} as well (see python/java for examples).
@item
If you would like to add language tweaks in your own config (ie: take full
control over what rmsbolt does completely), you can use
@code{rmsbolt-language-descriptor} to fully override the defaults with a custom
language definition.
@end itemize
@item
@uref{../rmsbolt.el,Add a new entry into the starter file}
@itemize
@item
For this, you will need to make a starter file. See @uref{./../starters/,this folder} for
existing examples.
@item
Ideally, try to pick something which is interesting to play with from an
disassembly point of view.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

You're done!

@c Emacs 25.1.1 (Org mode 8.2.10)
@bye